# 1: fundamentals

## 4: Variables

`use strict` is implied in classes and modules, which in my case means I've been
using it unknowingly for a good while.

declare variables using `let`

```javascript
let thisVar = "a variable";
```

we can do multiple assignments on one line (don't tho)

```javascript
let first = 1,
  second = "two",
  third = { value: "third" };
```

ah, even prettier knows better, and moves it to separate lines

valid variable name characters in js are [0-9][a-z][A-Z][_,$], and variables
can't start with digits. $name and \_name are (nominally) fine though.

Constants named with capitals are traditionally reserved for values known before
run-time (hardcoded or otherwise static), while constants named according to
another convention are set during run-time.

## 5: Data Types

JS values and variables are typed\*, according to one of 8 types. Lemme see if I
have them offhand:

object - key-value map, where the value can be of any type and the key can
usually be of most types.

string - set of encoded characters... actually here's a tangent:

> q: how does js do string encoding?

> a: utf-16
>
> of note: basically everything (including node, so yes, **actually**
> everything) else uses utf-8.
>
> both utf-8 and utf-16 use [up to] 4 bytes per character, however utf-8 encodes
> ascii characters using 8 bits, or 1 byte. this works because 2^8 = 128 and we
> only need 127 ascii characters. [As a result] utf-8 uses 7 bits in a
> single-byte character to represent all of the ascii table, and is backwards
> compatible therewith.
> practically (well, kind of) this means that

oh, binary to hex is: 8 bits can be represented as 2 hex characters, and if we
go the other way then 2 hex characters is one byte. 4 bits = 2^4 = 16 possible
values- and I'll stop there because I can count. the point being, 00001011 to
hex would be 0x0b.

number - works as expected, however there are a few special values to be aware
of

- Infinity - greater than any other number
- -Infinity - less than any other number
- NaN - not a number

also, numbers go 0 to +-2^53 - 1 = 9007199254740991, which is a constant as MAX_SAFE_INTEGER

bigint - for values bigger than the above

symbol - unique values, elaboration to be added

boolean - no way that's true

null - specifically nothing or empty

undefined - not defined

null == undefined is true, so..

`typeof null => "object"`, for whatever that's worth. Apparently this is regarded
as a bug that has now been codified.

Whereas `typeof undefined => "undefined"`

js has 7 primitives: everything that isn't object.

## 6: alert, prompt, confirm

- alert(message): shows a browser-specific message box for the given string until a user
  clicks the okay button

- prompt(title, default?): request a value from the user and return it. Optional
  default value/input for the text box. Returns null if canceled.

  - if you don't supply a default then ie replaces the default with "undefined"
    which is... not null, and very not helpful.

- confirm(string): shows a modal with Okay and Cancel buttons, returns the
  boolean value associated with the selection.

  > actually, can I break this?

  > no, and I don't think it's worth the time to dig into trying.

by way of summary:

- alert() shows a text box

- prompt() shows a text box with a single-line text input field

- confirm() shows a modal with okay and cancel buttons

## 7: conversions

converting a non-numeric string to a number results in NaN

converting _any_ non-empty string (including "0") to boolean returns true

## 8: basic operators + math

negative numbers are, e.g `x = -2`

js has 6 mathematical operators:

- \+
- \-
- \*
- /
- \*\*
- %

In a grand tradition, the addition operator concatenates strings if either of
the operands _immediately adjacent to it_ is a string. e.g, `2 + 2 + '1'` will
read left to right and add the 2s, then concatenate the result with the 1
because it is a string.

The `+` operator also converts a value to a number using the same logic as
Number(x)

`+` only does this when it has no left operand, so if we want to convert then
add we have to do silly such as `+"1" + +"6"`

the above works because unary plus (i.e converting to a number) has a higher
**precedence** than addition (15 > 12, for the curious)

All operators in js return a value. This includes the `=` operator. This means
that

```javascript
let c = (a = 3);

const d = c - 2;
return d;
```

will return 3, as d has the value of c - 2- nevermind you know how arithmetic
works. We can use this effect to perform logic on whether or not an assignment succeeds.

```javascript
if ((c = getThing())) {
  dostuff();
}
```

will not run when getThing returns a falsy value.

`++` and `--` are increment and decrement operators respsectively. `++c` will
increment c in-place. Putting them before a variable returns the variable after
the change, e.g `c = 2; a = ++c;` will result in a=3, whereas `c = 2; a = c++;`
will result in c = 3 and a = 2;

js _can_ do bitwise operations (AND, OR, XOR, NOT, etc.), but... I hope to never
do that.

the `,` operator performse several operations, returning the result of the last
one. It has **lower precedence** than the `=` operator, so be careful with that.

## 9: Comparisons

Comparison operators `<, >, ==, ===, !=, et al.` perform the associated
comparison on the operands on either side, then return a boolean value
containing the result. This is interesting to me right now because it means

```javascript
return (5 > 4) + 1;
```

returns 2, because 5 > 4 == true and Number(true) = 1

js compares strings letter by letter. Lower case has a lower value than upper
case, so I suppose this is using an ascii table somewhere behind the scenes.

> Note: Capital letters come first in ascii tables so a > A and b > a

\_When converting values of different types, **JS converts the values to numbers**

two nominally similar values of different types can evaluate as boolean
differently. `"0"` will evaluate to true because it is a non-empty string,
whereas 0 will be false because it is a falsy value.

`0 == false => true`, but `0 === false => false`, because type checking.
Non-type-safe comparisons cast to boolean first, where as === won't.

`null == undefined => true`, `null === undefined => false`

When we do math or make a numerical `<, >, <=, >=` comparison with null and undefined:

- null becomes `0`

  - **this is not the case for == or !=**, only the mathematical comparisons
    convert null to 0. For == and !=, null and undefined are _only_ equal to
    each other.

    ```javascript
    null == 0; // false, because 0 is not undefined and null is only equal to undefined
    null >= 0; // true, because it converts to 0
    undefined == 0; // false, undefined == [null, undefined] ONLY
    undefined > 0; // false, undefined becomes NaN when converted to a number
    ```

- undefined becomes `NaN`
  - of note, NaN returns false for all comparisons always, whereas null is 0 in
    some cases.

## 10: Conditional branching with if and ?

the `?` is used specifically for conditional assignment and has low precedence,
so while we don't technically need parentheses in `a = (b == 2) ? 'yes' : 'no'`,
you should still put them there

### Chaining ? operators

```javascript
if (thing == 2) {
  // do
} else if (thing == 3) {
  // doelse
} else if (thing == 4) {
  // doelseelse
} else {
  // dofinal
}
```

can be expressed as (and this is gross in my head so pardon mistakes)

```javascript
(thing == 2) ? do :
  (thing == 3) ? doElse :
  (thing == 4) ? doElseElse :
  final
```

> Using ? as a replacement for if in this way is difficult to read, try not to
> do it. That is, try to only use ? for conditional assignment.

Here's an example from an exercise in the tutorial

```javascript
const userAnswer = prompt("What is the 'official' name of JS?");
if (userAnswer.toLowerCase() == "Ecmascript".toLowerCase()) {
  alert("Correct");
} else {
  alert("incorrect");
}

// the bad way would be

// this is clever, but not useful. Do not do this.
prompt("What is... ?") == "Ecmascript" ? alert("correct") : alert("incorrect");
```

The bottom is clever, and it _may_ be fun to write, but don't. Future you and
everyone else will hit friction on it.

airbnb says do not nest ternaries, it's gross. Similarly, prettier makes them
gross if you nest them. â›” ðŸ¦

## 11: Operators

`||` is _or_
(anything but false) || (anything but also false) => true
false || false => false

if an operand is not boolean it converts to boolean

we can use `||` to do some nifty assignment tricks, e.g

```javascript
a = false || 0 || true; // => true
```

The statements in the `or` chain are evaluated left to right. If any of them
returns a result that boolean-coverts to true then the value is returned and the
chain stops. That is,

```javascript
b = "" || true || 0; // => true, execution stops at the non-false value
```

If all operands evaluate to false, the chain returns the last operand. That is,
if the last operand is 0 the chain will return 0, _not false_.

`||` can be used similarly to an if statement in that if the value to the left
is falsey the statement to the right will be executed, i.e `false || doThing();`. This is clever, so do not do it.

`&&` is AND

The unusual thing about `&&` is similar to the special chaining behavior of
`||`, but reversed: If we chain a bunch of statements together using &&, the
value of the first _falsey_ value is returned. By extension, if all operands in
the chain are truthy, the value of the last operand is returned.

`&&` has higher precedence than `||`, meaning that &&s will be evaluated first,
then compared using ||.

`!`: boolean NOT
does one thing with two steps: Convert the operand to its right to boolean, and
return the opposite boolean value. Thus,

```javascript
!true; // -> false
!0; // -> true
!""; // true
!"0"; // false
```

`!!` can be used to convert a value to boolean. `!!"banana"` yields true, for
example.

`!` has the highest precedence of any logical operator. Remember that this
includes the behavior of converting an object to boolean, which can change the
behavior of other operators with lower precedence.

_!important: functions that return no value actually return undefined._

Another reminder:

- Chaining operands with `||` will return the first operand that
  evaluates as truthy, or the last operand
- Chaining `&&` will return the first operand that evaluates as falsey, or the
  last operand.

## 12: Nullish coalescing operator ??

> To keep things simple, this section uses the term "defined" to refer to an
> expression which is neither null nor undefined

`??` is useful for assignment where we have 2 values which may or may not be
defined.

Essentially, it works in the form "If the left statement result is defined, use
that one, if not then use the right statement". I think the easiest use for this
to wrap one's head around is assignment, where it lets us assign to a value (the
left operand) that may or may not exist, or fallback to the right operand if the
left is not usable. We can use the same concept to define a default value to a
variable (or we could... use a less clever way).

Oh. We can chain them. Cause reasons. Same deal as the `||` and `&&`, returns
the first value that is null or undefined, or returns the last value if all are.
This will behave similarly to `||` in many cases, but the advantage of `??` is
that it can return false, 0, and empty strings, as these values are defined.
These values all evaluate to false, and would otherwise fall through `||`.
Essentially, `??` is a more predictable tool than `||` for assigning when a value has a use.

### precedence(||) == precedence(??)

The thing to remember here: `??/||` will evaluated _after_ mathematical
operators incl. `+`. Be careful, and make generous use of parens.

using `??` with `||` or `&&` is a syntax error unless you specify an order using
parentheses.

## 13: L00ps (while and for)

```javascript
while (thing) {
  doSomething;
}

do {
  something;
} while (thing);

for (begin; condition; step) {
  // semicolons non-negotiable
  thing;
}

for (;;) {
  // infinite loop
  thing;
  break; // exit the loop
}

for (;;) {
  thing();
  continue;
  thing(); // unreachable, continue goes to next iteration of the loop
}
```

### directives

Ah rip, thought I'd get through this in only comments but guess not.

`break` and `continue` are language parts referred to as _directives_, which
means they are not statements and cannot be used where a statement would be.
Specifically, expect this to be a compiler (yes I know and yes I know,
typescript says hi) error if attempting to use them with `?`. The lesson here:
use `if`, not `?`.

### labels

...aaand another one. It's okay, means these are new. Learning new things is
good, that's why I'm here.

So at first blush I thought this shadowed the typescript type syntax, but it's
actually on the other side. A **Label** is an identifier you can add before a
loop (specifically the keywords `for` and `while`) to let you `break` or
`continue` a specific loop iteration inside a nested loop.

```javascript
labelName: for (;;) {
  thing();
}

// or more practically
outer: while (true) {
  for (let i = 0; i < 32; i++) {
    const response = prompt(`is ${i} 29 yet?`);
    if (response == "yes") break outer; // when we get the right value, break out of the infinite loop
  }
}

for (let i = 2; i < 11; i++) i % 2 == 0 ? console.log(i) : undefined;

// aaaaand refactored to not get me fired (I do see the appeal of
// writing like the above though, very comfy )
for (let i = 2; i < 11; i++) {
  if (i % 2 == 0) {
    console.log(i);
  }
}
```

## 14: switches

```javascript
switch(x) {
  case 'v1':
    //dostuff
    break;

  case var: // does this compare to the var's truthiness, or to the value?
    dostuff();
    break;

}
```

We can put any expression in a switch statement, and if the variable being
checked is strictly equal to the value returned, the case will run.

Also we can squash cases:

```javascript
switch (thing) {
  case 1:
  case 2:
  case b + 1:
    doThing(); // this will run for any of the above cases, kinda neat
    break;
}
```

Also, for completeness' sake: if you don't put a break after a statement, the
next case will run no matter what. This means that, in the above case, if thing
is 2 then execution falls through to doThing and still occurs.

## 15: Functions ðŸ¥©ðŸ¥”

Declare functions using `function name(){}` syntax, or `function name(var){}`.

### Scope stuff

If a variable is declared both outside and inside a function then the inner
value will be used.

```javascript

let a = 2;

func bah() {
  let a = 6;
  console.log(a); // prints 6
}
```

JS passes by value (for function invocations), so the following will not change
the outer instance of banana.

```javascript
let banana = 2;

function edit(banana) {
  banana = 4;
}

edit(banana);
console.log(banana); // prints 2
```

For ease of memory: arguments are passed and assigned to the local variables
specified in the function declaration.

### undefined and defaults

Values not specified in a function invocation become undefined (or typescript
bitches at you unless the value is optional). We can provide default values
using `=`, e.g `function bah(item = 2){doThing}`, where if item is provided it
will be the given value, and if not it will be 2.

We can assign a default value that will be retrieved from a function, but this
function only runs if the argument it's default for is omitted.

Return values using `return thing`. In that case, if thing is not included or
has no value then the function returns undefined

### guidelines

> A couple guidelines for writing functions that suck less
>
> - use short, descriptive names
> - don't use outer variables
> - keep them short, ideally to a single operation

## 16: function expressions (hooray, fun stuff)

You can also create functions using the syntax

```javascript
let name = function (/*args*/) {
  //body
}; // note the semicolon, this marks the end of the assignment
```

This is a _function expression_. This works because functions are values, so in
either case we are creating a function and assigning it to a given variable/name.

**Functions are objects**, which means we can move, copy, pass, and modify them
like anything else in the language. This is dope because it allows for some
stuff I believe we'll see later.

### Callbacks

We can pass functions as arguments, and then call those functions within the
parent invocation. These functions are called _callbacks_, and this is _extremely useful_, especially for some techniques
later. For now, it looks like this:

```javascript
function doA() {
  a();
}

function doesB(argA) {
  if (Math.floor(Math.random() * 2)) {
    argA(); // call the function we passed as an argument, in this case doA
  }
}
```

We can also do this inline with function expressions

```javascript
let a = function (first, second) {
  first();
  second();
};

a(
  function () {
    console.log("a is first");
  },
  function () {
    console.log("b is second");
  }
);
```

The two functions we included in the invocation of a are called **anonymous
functions**, because they have no name.

> Of note: function _expressions_ (let x = functio...) are not hoisted, meaning
> they are not reorganized before the file is run so that they appear at the
> top. This means that these functions cannot be used before they are assigned,
> they are only available after their assignment statement is reached.

Also, function expressions are block scoped. Unless you're assinging them to
outer variables they aren't preserved outside of the block that runs them, same
as other variables.

17: Arrow function basics

Yisssss, my favorites. We're hitting the basics of these now, but I'm excited
for the later chapters that expand on them.

Arrow functions look like

```javascript
(/*params*/) => {
  doStuff();
  return stuff;
};
```

They are (for the moment and in brief) a shorter, much more brain-pleasing
syntax for function expressions. They come in many different forms, including:

- If there is only one parameter for the function they can be written without
  parentheses (however, if there are 0 parameters they are required).

- If the function is only one line we can write the arrow function without
  brackets or the `return` statement. The result of the function body (the one
  line) will be implicitly returned. e.g `(thing) => thing * 2` is an arrow
  function that accepts one parameter and returns its double.

- the above 2 can be combined, e.g `thing => thing * 2` is the same as the
  previous implementation as far as the interpreter is concernetd.
