# 2: Code Quality

Time to go from functional to ~~elegant~~ ~~expressive~~ ~~not a lint error~~
readable.

## 1: Debugging in the browser

okaaaaay...

Javascript runs in the browser. The browser is a very important piece of
software, culturally/statistically speaking. Software engineers will optimize
everything. Software engineers don't like doing things. Doing things is a
thing, and as such can be optimized. Software engineers often do things for the browser.

Add it up, and what do you get: oh look a shiny suite of developer tools
(cmd/ctrl + shift + I or f12 most of the time).

These are the _best_ ~~if your project has a source map~~. There are tools for
examining every file loaded for the current page, a console for
~~optimal debugging via console.log~~ outputting and testing things, and an
actual debugger for ~~realizing the existence of way too late into a real job~~
debugging and saving **all** the time.

ummm... highlights I guess

- debugger is friend. Set breakpoints by finding the file in the sources window
  (supports fuzzy finding via cmd/ctrl + p) and clicking a line number, then
  step through them using the little control buttons.

- The watch tab of the debugger page lets you set statements and view their
  calculated values at all times. VV useful if you're doing formulas and stuff.
  I'll note that this appears to take a reload before they show up after being added.

- The elements pane will show all the elements in the dom, as well as their
  computed styling, which is great. You can also pick an element and add styles
  to it for quick testing.

- Essentially, if it is a thing that javascript can do, or that the browser
  needs to track, you can examine and poke at it here.

- Network tab is a godsend, please use it and don't log json.

## 2: coding style

1. Install prettier
2. Don't not install prettier
3. ???
4. format

Nah but for real, whoever you're working with probably has opinions already, and
if you're the one who's supposed to pick then you probably have them too.

## 3: comments

do a commenting with `//`

do a long commenting with `/* [thing] */`

Try to use variable and other names such that code can be read without comments,
but absolutely _do_ use comments where necessary. As an anecdote, comments are
actively discouraged during code review at my current employer, and it is the
worst. Not fun.

## 4: 🥷

just... don't be dumb or clever (in your approach to writing something). The
simple way that anyone can read and understand is better than doing it in one
line in _every_ case where you aren't the only person working on this project.
Use smart variable names, split code up where appropriate, don't do one liners,
in general simply _do not be clever for the sake of being clever_, do the thing
that best accomplishes the task clearly.

## 5: testing

BDD is a new term for me: the practice of developing software by designing
first/using for tests and docs and examples. Essentially, focus on designing a
system that works the way you expect it to by writing tests, docs, and examples
_of that behavior_, not of the code you've written to make it.

But we're here for testing, so:

In many/most test runners we write a spec, or a specification of how the code
we're testing should behave. The spec then runs the code with given values and
given expections of how the code should behave for those values, and checks to
make sure everything is working as intended.

### Writing a test

In every case I've seen, and as I understand it _nearly_ every case, tests look
something like this:

add-number_spec.ts

```javascript
describe("add number", () => {
  it("should add 0 and 0 to get 0", () => {
    // this is the part that varies wildly depending on the testing platform you use, I'm used to cypress/jest from work but the tutorial uses mocha where it looks like the second example
    expect(addNumber(0, 0)).toBe(0);

    assert.equal(addNumber(0, 0), 0);
  });

  it("Should return 2 from 1 + 1", () => {
    // expect that calling addNumber with 1 and 1 will return 2
    assert.equal(addNumber(1, 1), 2);
  });
});
```

An ideal (to many) development flow runs as such:

1. Write a spec for functionality
2. Write or change code until that test passes
3. Do the above until the pretty chart turns green or the project is finished or
   (ideally) both

Generally, adding more test cases to check more functionality of your code is
never a bad thing. Focus first on covering core functionality (web page opens),
then major feature basic behaviors (adding an item to the cart works), then
corner cases (what happens if a user tries to add a malformed item) and advanced
behaviors.

### An anecdote on mocha

[mocha](https://mochajs.org/) is new to me, but the tutorial explains the
different packages [most commonly] involved in its use in a clean list

- mocha is the actual runner
- chai is a package of pre-made assertions and other useful bits for use with
  mocha.
- sinon adds advanced functionality that can help us with more complex scenarios
  (at a guess: async stuff almost certainly, class stuff probably)

## 6: ~~something build tools this way comes~~ polyfills and transpilers

JS is a constantly (on a year-by-year basis) growing and evolving language.
Browsers are... less so? Also they have opinions. Practically: every feature of
javascript may not be available in every browser. As a result we need a way to
convert modern code that uses these functions to code that works correctly in
older browser. Enter transpilers and polyfills, two tools to convert modern code
to less-modern code that can run on a wider variety of
systems/browsers/toasters.

Transpilers convert modern code to less-modern code wholesale, interpreting
functions and replacing them with older code that works the same.

Polyfills cover for missing browser features, supplying them if they aren't
currently included in the browser that runs the code they're part of.
