# 3: object basics

## 1: definitions and basics

Objects are sets of key-value pairs where the value can be of any type included
in js (including also object). They look a little like this

```javascript
const Ben = {
  lettersInName: 3,
  favoritePokemon: "Yamper",
  likesJS: true,
  opinions: {
    Zoe: "love",
    James: "like",
    Nate: "like",
    Charlie: "like",
    Eric: "like",
  },
  dog: undefined,
  timeUntil23: null,
};
```

Note the commas: objects are sets of properties, the properties are simply
created instead of assigned, so we don't end their lines with `;`.

Object properties can be deleted using the `delete` keyword.

### computed properties

Many times it will be convenient (though, thanks to ts, absolutely improper) to
dynamically assign the name of a property on an object. We do this by
surrounding the property name with `[]`.

```javascript

let pokemon = "Yamper";

const pokemons = {
  [pokemon] = "best"
}

console.log(pokemons?.Yamper); // logs "best"
```

You can think of it as a shorthand for creating a property at a string key using
bracket notation.

And of course, the whole statement inside the square brackets is evaluated,
meaning we can use any of the tricks we've seen so far, provided they return a
string (but everything can cast to a string somehow, so go wild).

### property-value shorthand

if we have variables and we want to create an object with properties where the
key is the name of the variable and the value is the value of the variable, we
can just add the variable in the object.

```javascript
const isFruit = true;

const banana = {
  isFruit,
};

console.log(banana.isFruit); // logs true
```

All property accesses are valid, meaning that accessing a property that doesn't
exist on an object returns undefined. Since that check and comparing the value
to undefined to create a boolean is so common, we can instead use the `in`
keyword to check whether a property is part of an object.

```javascript
const Ben = {
  favoritePokemon: "Yamper",
};

if ("favoritePokemon" in Ben) console.log(Ben.favoritePokemon);
// unnecessary due to optional chaining, but prints "Yamper" and gets the point across
```

Naturally, we can substitute an expression to the left of the `in`, and the
expression must return a string corresponding to the property to be tested.

Iterate over the properties (that is, keys, not key-value pairs) of an object
using `for(label in object){doThing(label)}` syntax.

When iterating over objects, keys that can evaluate to integers are sorted in
ascending order, while other properties are unsorted.

tl;dr

```javascript
const smolEx = {
  15: "yes",
  Ben: "yessir",
  Allonsy: "kinda",
  0: "0",
};

for (let key in smolEx) {
  console.log(`${key}: ${smolEx[key]}`);
}
```

The above prints keys in the order 0, 15, Ben, Allonsy, so sorted
integer-convertible keys first, then remainders as-is.

## 2: Object references and copying

### Reference

**OBJECTS ARE STORED IN VARIABLES BY REFERENCE**

Passing a variable assigned to an object passes the address of the object in
memory, NOT the object literal. This is a memory-saving thing.

Copying a variable containing an object, therefore, creates a copy of the memory
address to the _same_ object literal, it does not create another instance of the
same object.

Remember that js passes by value for everything, so when you call a function
with a variable it is the value contained by the variable that gets passed in.
However, extending the above, passing an object as an argument passes the value
of the _memory address_ containing the object literal. This means that changes
to that object within a function _will_ affect the object itself, as the memory
address will refer to the same object.

### Comparison

Objects are only equal when they are the same object, that is they share a
memory address. Two objects with the same content content are not equal.

### Cloning

Copying (that is, creating another object with the same content as) an object
requires iterating over the copied object's properties and assigning their
values in a new object. E.g

```javascript
const newObj = {}; // remember, the memory address is constant, not the content

for (let key in oldObj) {
  newObj[key] = oldObj[key];
}

newObj; // now has the same content as oldObj
```

We can also use `Object.assign(source, [targets])` to copy all the properties of
target objects to the source object. This results in the same thing as doing the
above copying syntax from the source objects to the new syntax one by one. This
means that if source object 2 has a property in common with source object 1, the
property from object 2 will overwrite the one from obj 1. That sentence is dumb,
here's an example.

```javascript
const obj1 = {
  name: "Ben",
  id: 0,
};

const obj2 = {
  hex: "0xff",
  id: 1,
};

const target = {};

Object.assign(target, [obj1, obj2]);
// assign also returns the modified object, so if we want we can write it this way instead
const newObj2 = Object.assign({}, [obj1, obj2]); // note the empty object

target ==
  {
    name: "Ben",
    id: 1,
    hex: "0xff",
  };
```

For all of the above, if an object property is also an object, cloning will not
work because the memory address of the child object will be copied, resulting in
an imperfect clone. To avoid this we would have to iterate over each property
and check if the value is an object, then deep clone that object, repeat ad
recursivum.

## 3: Garbage collection

JS automatically handles memory management! It uses a garbage collector that
automatically deletes objects that are no longer needed.

### Reachable

The garbage collector will delete an object if it is no longer "reachable". An
object is considered unreachable when it is

- no longer referenced in any current scope (global, a currently running
  function or other block, the call stack)
- not able to be accessed by any chain of references from the current state
  (that is, there is no possible call chain that could get to this object)

### Mark and sweep

The garbage collector works by checking every possible reference of every object
in the current and loaded scopes and recursively marking all of their children
as reachable. Then it deletes all the unmarked objects.

## 4: This

Objects can have functions as properties, at which point we refer to them as
methods.

```javascript
const Ben = {
  fed: 10,
  slept: 8,
  eat: function () {
    doEating();
  },
  sleep() {
    //sleep whenever able
  },
};
```

Often the methods in an object will need to refer to the properties of the
object to perform their task. For example, the above sleep functiona might need
to access or change the slept variable. We access the object using the `this`
keyword.

`This` refers to the object (context?) calling the method, so in the above case
if sleep() accessed slept using `this.slept`, this would refer to Ben because
Ben is the context/object in/from which sleep() is called. As a shorthand, if we
call a method using thing.method(), `this` refers to the object before the dot.

### unbound this

`this` refers to the object that _called_ a method, not on the method or object
where the function was declared. That is, if we use the same function to call
`this` in 2 different objects, the `this` in the method body will refer to each
of those objects, not the one where it was originally written.

### arrow functions

If we call `this` within an arrow function, it will not refer to the function
that called the arrow function, but to the `this` that called the parent. This
is... harder to explain than to write.

```javascript
const Ben = {
  name: "bwah",
  arrow() {
    const arrowFunc = () => console.log(this?.firstName);
    arrowFunc(); // logs bwah
  },
  notArrow() {
    function not() {
      console.log(this?.firstName);
    }
    not();
    // logs undefined, because the context is the notArrow function, not the outer Ben scope
    // in fact, the this in this function is also undefined
    // the above is a product of strict mode, where an unset execution context
    // causes this to return undefined.
    //
    //
  },
};
```

To reiterate, calling a function from within another function (without taking
other steps) will set the child function's `this` to the global object, or to
undefined if in strict mode.

In strict mode, calling `this` within a function returns undefined unless
otherwise caused to do otherwise. Outside of strict mode, `this` will refer to
the global context.
